Hi everybody physics ninja here today I want to look at a problem known as the wheatstone bridge problem
wheatstone bridge is a circuit as I shown here typically uses four values of the resistance or resistors
and one of the values is unknown in this case the value of the unknown resistance is going to be this
one this value of our X. Now depending on the values of the three other resistors it is possible to
balance a wheatstone bridge and what that term means.
If you read a question it says that the bridge is balance it basically means that the current flowing
through the center branch is equal to zero.
Now you can either measure the voltage across points B and D on the circuit and if that reading is zero
then there is no potential difference there will not be a current flowing in that branch or sometimes
you place a Galvin dominator.
So you this typically uses the letter G for it and that's simply a device that measures current flowing
through that wire and in that case if there's no deflection in the needle of the galvanic emitter it
means there is that the bridge is balanced when the is balance.
I can actually solve for the value of this unknown resistance and that's what I'm going to do today.
I'm going to show you how to get the value of our x in terms of the other three resistors.
ALL RIGHT SO HERE'S THE CIRCUIT AGAIN THAT I'M GONNA CONSIDER again I'm going to say that this bridge
is balanced which means that the current flowing down that center branch is zero.
That means one thing that the voltage between points D and B has to be zero.
If there's any potential difference between both of those points and if we have a kind of a wire linking
them there will be a current flowing through there.
So it's very important here that we have this condition over here and again or that the current I through
that center branch has to be equal to zero.
And this kind of depends on what measuring device you use if you're using a Galvin emitter.
You can easily measure that the current to zero if there's no deflection in that needle.
All right.
So once we have established both of these criteria we're now going to do is we're gonna simply do some
loops we're gonna use the cure cost loop rule in order to get to a relationship that allows us to solve
for this unknown resistance.
So first I'm going to do a loop like this and it really doesn't matter which loop you use we're gonna
assume here that this battery over here has an IMF equal to E and we're not even going to use that the
loops I'm gonna choose are going to be this one and then I'll choose this other triangle here on the
right hand side.
So first things first let's define some current values.
I'm gonna assume here that the current flowing through this branch here.
Let's just give it a name let's call it i1 and let's assume here that the current flowing down here
through resistance are 3 let's call it ie three that's fine.
Now have a look at the current.
If I have a current I want flowing up here.
Once it reaches this know that I've labeled b over here.
If there is no current flowing down the center branch if the bridge is balanced that means that you're
also going to have the same current ie one flowing over here and you're also going to have the same
current ie three flowing through this unknown resistance because there's no current in that center branch.
OK.
So let's do the loop rule again the loop rule means you add up all of the voltage differences across
resistors and if you go back to where you started those should sum the zero.
OK so let's do the first loop the first loop.
I'm going to label it a B.
I'm going to go down here to D and then I'm going to go back to a point where I started.
So why would that loop rule look like.
Well the first thing I encountered is a resistor.
If the current is flowing through the resistor in this fashion and I'm going in the same direction that
means there is a voltage drop across that resistor and the voltage drop is i1 R1 that's given by Ohm's
Law.
Next thing I'm going to do I'm going to go down the center branch but we said if the bridge is balanced
there is no current.
So there is no voltage drop across this point over here so there's nothing else to add.
The next thing I'm going to do now is I'm going to go across the resistance are three.
However look at I'm going across an opposite direction of the current which means I'm going from a low
potential to a high potential.
So the voltage difference now it's important to have this negative sign here.
It's going to be given by Ohm's Law I three are three and that there equals the zero.
So that's my first equation.
Next equation I'm gonna do now I'm going to do this other loop.
Let's go ahead and kind of draw it out here.
Let's start at point B and I'm gonna do a loop on this side because I have to introduce the variable
r x somehow.
So let's do a loop like this so that loop would be starting at point B C D and then back to be okay.
So let's go ahead and do this.
The first thing I encounter here if I am going round this loop is the resistance R to the voltage drop
across that resistance is I want R2.
That's the voltage drop given by Ohm's Law.
The next thing I encounter now is I'm at point C going toward Point D.
I'm encountering this unknown resistance R X and I'm moving my loop as I'm going around it in the opposite
direction of the current so I go from a low to a high potential and in this case over here it would
be I three multiplied by hour X All right equals to zero.
Now we're going to rearrange these equations a little bit.
Let's go back to one I'll call it one star and I'm simply going to bring this second term here on the
other side just the right in nice friendly friendly form.
We're almost done next thing I'm gonna do the same step here for equation to just rewrite it a little
bit.
I1 R2 equals to i3 r x okay.
Now what I want to do now is eliminate the current values in one way to eliminate the current values
notice I have I want on this side I also have i1 on the left hand side for equation 2 and on this side
I also have the same current right I 3.
So what I can do a simple way to kind of eliminate them is simply to do equation 1 divided by equation
2 and I can do that all right because as long as these currents are not zero they're not going to be
zero I can divide by equation too.
So what do we get if we do that.
Well we're gonna get our one over here.
We're going to get our two over here.
We're gonna get our three here and our X which is our unknown resistance which is really what we're
trying to find.
So what I do now is I'm simply going to rearrange this.
I can bring our X on this side.
I can bring our two on this side and this equation here simply becomes our X multiplied by our 1 equals
to our 2 multiplied by our 3.
This is really the equation that we need in order to solve it.
And I'll write it down one more time the other thing I could do now is if I'm really just looking for
our X I simply have to divide through by the value R 1 and you're left with this expression.
So if we know the values of our 1 hour to an hour 3 and we measure that the current is 0 through this
center branch.
That means that our weed Stonebridge is balanced and that condition is satisfied as long as our value
of the unknown resistance which I can measure is going to be equal to this value over here.
Now this might look like how do I kind of remember that without doing all these steps right if it's
just a test.
For example what you want to do here is if you look at the equation here in the red box.
Notice that I am multiplying resistances that are diagonal from each other right.
If I multiply resistances that are diagonal from each other I get the equation here in the red box and
it's very easy to solve for the unknown resistance.
All right so let's go to the next page and we'll actually solve a problem to solve for this.
All right.
So here's my weed Stonebridge problem here we're gonna assume again that it's balance.
So this volt meter here is reading 0 volts.
How do we find the unknown resistance.
Our x r 1 is equal to 15 ohms are two is 900 homes are three is fifty ohms.
So the way you do this again you simply have to remember in order solve for our X. We need to remember
the equation.
It's very simple if you simply cross multiply the resistors that are opposite of each other all you
have to do now is write down our equation.
So this here would be our 1 multiplied by our X has to be equal to our 2 multiplied by our 3.
OK so our X hour two hour three over hour one.
Now you simply substitute our values in here are two is nine hundred are three was fifty OK an hour
one was fifteen fifteen goes in ninety six times three are left with sixty multiplied by fifty.
Now that gives me three thousand so if our X equals to three thousand ohms there will be no current
flowing through the center branch and the Wheatstone bridge will be balanced okay if our x is any other
value I will measure a deflection I will have a current flowing through down this center branch.
Okay that's really what it means over here only for this specific value of the resistance will I get
zero deflection from that no current flowing through that center branch.